# DFE inference
This Markdown file describes the steps taken to infer the joint DFE of each mutation type for Boston Harbor *P. leucopus* and Gulf Islands *P. maniculatus* population pairs.  

## Methodological details
To draw inferences about the DFE, we employ the approach of Huang et al. (2021), which extends DFE inference to the case of two, recently diverged populations. Here, allele frequency dynamics at fitness-affecting variants reflect not only the joint demographic history of the two populations, but also the cumulative effects of selection acting in a shared ancestral population and (potentially) divergent selective regimes acting in contemporary populations following their split. This is achieved by allowing mutations with selective effect s1 in the ancestral population to assume a new selective effect s2 in the diverging population following its split. Modeling the impact of this joint distribution of selective effects (s1, s2) on joint allele frequencies requires “caching” 2D expected SFS under a 2D model of demographic history across a range of γ pairs (γ1, γ2). 

We then fit two bivariate parameterizations of the joint DFE to these cached spectra: a bivariate lognormal distribution with distinct marginal parameters (μ1 ≠ μ2 and σ1 ≠ σ2), and a bivariate lognormal distribution with shared marginal parameters (μ1 = μ2 and σ1 = σ2). Nested within these two different joint DFE parameterizations, we consider three different DFE types: (1) a “deleterious-only” DFE, where selection coefficients are continuously distributed according to a lognormal distribution with all γ < 0, (2) a “deleterious + neutral” DFE, where a proportion Pneu of mutations have a fixed γ = 0 and a proportion 1 – Pneu of mutations have a continuous, lognormal distribution of deleterious selection coefficients (γ < 0), and (3) a “deleterious + beneficial” DFE, where a proportion Ppos of mutations have a fixed γ ∈ [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] and a proportion 1 – Ppos of mutations have a continuous, lognormal distribution of deleterious selection coefficients (γ < 0). For the “deleterious + neutral” and “deleterious + positive” DFE types, we assume that the discrete point mass (Pneu or Ppos) is symmetric between populations.

Finally, we use the Godambe Information Matrix (GIM) methods of Coffman et al. (2016) to conduct likelihood ratio tests for nested models, compute model AIC, and estimate parameter uncertainties in a manner appropriate for composite likelihoods. 

All scripts used in the analyses described below can be found in this directory.  

## Software
All of the software used for these analyses are described in the [packages](https://github.com/ekhowell/island_mainland_dfe/tree/main/packages) directory.

## Analysis and code
Prior to inference with ∂a∂i, the input VCFs containing the polarized allele frequencies for each mutation types and each multi-population callset must be turned into ∂a∂i-compatible 2D FS objects for each pair of populations (i.e., creating a joint, unfolded 2D SFS). This can be acheived by running the `create_fs.py` script for each pair of populations:
```
python create_fs.py --vcf {mutation_type.vcf.gz} --fspre {pop1_pop2_mutation_type.fs} --popfile {pop1_pop2.popfile} --dimensions 2
```
Here, the `mutation_type.vcf.gz` contains the polarized allele frequencies for SNPs of the given mutation type which we assume to be experiencing selection. The `--fspre` flag specifies what the output `.fs` file should be named. The `--popfile` flag specifies a population manifest (formatted as `[sample] [population]`) which contains the sample name and population affiliation for the given population pair.

Next, we generate the expected 2D SFS for each population pair under the inferred demographic history and an arbitrary distribution of paired selection coefficients. To compute the expected jSFS for a given γ1, γ2 pair, we modified the demographic functions defined in the `/demographic_modeling` directory to include a `gamma` argument in the `dadi.PhiManip.phi_1D` function. This instantiates the population allele frequency spectrum, `phi`, with a fixed selective effect of 2NAncs, where s is the selective advantage and genotypic fitnesses in the homozygous ancestral, heterozygous, and homozygous derived classes are given as 1, 1+2sh, and 1+2s. We assume that h=0.5 for all mutations, such that they act in a semi-dominant manner. For all island-mainland demographic models, we assume that selective effects may diverge immediately following the instantaneous split between populations. Following this split, subsequent manipulations of `phi` assign distinct `gamma1`  and `gamma2` to the island and mainland populations. We assume that selective effects in the ancestral population remain constant in the mainland population. For island-island demographic models, we randomly choose which island population is assigned `gamma1` versus `gamma2` following their split from a shared ancestor. For each demographic model, we also model shared selective effects (`gamma1` == `gamma2`) between populations following their split, though these cached spectra were not used for inference under the bivariate lognormal DFE models employed here. 

These demography + *divergent* selection models are defined in the following functions:
- `boston_harbor_ind_sel()`, which corresponds to all island-mainland and island-island comparisons in Boston Harbor *P. leucopus*
- `gulf_islands_ivm_ind_sel()`, which corresponds to island-mainland comparisons in Gulf Islands *P. maniculatus*
- `gulf_islands_ivi_ind_sel()`, which corresponds to island-island comparisons in Gulf Islands *P. maniculatus*

While the demography + *shared* selection models (not used in the paper) are defined in the following functions:
- `boston_harbor_shared_sel()`, which corresponds to all island-mainland and island-island comparisons in Boston Harbor *P. leucopus*
- `gulf_islands_ivm_shared_sel()`, which corresponds to island-mainland comparisons in Gulf Islands *P. maniculatus*
- `gulf_islands_ivi_shared_sel()`, which corresponds to island-island comparisons in Gulf Islands *P. maniculatus*

These models are defined in the `dfe_cache.py` python script, which generates expected 2D SFS under each demographic + selection model for 100 logarithmically-spaced deleterious γ1, γ2 pairs within the range [-2000, -1x10-4]. In order to fit joint DFE models with point masses of neutral and beneficial mutations, we used the `additional_gammas` argument to cache expected 2D SFS for an additional set of neutral and positive selection coefficients: γ1, γ2 ∈ [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5].

This `dfe_cache.py` script can be run as follows:
```
python dfe_cache.py --prefix {output} --fs {pop1_pop2_mutation_type.fs} --shared_sel_model {boston_harbor_shared_sel, gulf_islands_ivm_shared_sel, gulf_islands_ivi_shared_sel} --ind_sel_model {boston_harbor_ind_sel, gulf_islands_ivm_ind_sel, gulf_islands_ivi_ind_sel} --demog_params {param1 param2 ... paramN}
```
Where the `--fspre` flag specifies an FS object to use for matching sample sizes, the `--shared_sel_model` specifies the model of demography + *shared* selection that should be used (not applicable to the bivariate lognormal joint DFE parameterizations used here), the `--ind_sel_model` specifies the model of demography + *divergent* selection that should be used, and the `--demog_params` flag provides a space-separated list of demographic parameters (excluding theta, the likelihood, and p_misid) that were inferred based on a neutral subset of SNPs. This returns `.bpkl` objects containing the 1D (for shared selection) and 2D caches generated under the specified model. 

Once these expected spectra have been cached, we can then use them to estimate joint DFE parameters. The `dfe_models.py` conducts this maximum-likelihood estimation starting from a single intial draw of parameter values. This script conducts parameter optimization in an iterative manner, outputting the top parameter estimates from three independent runs, and performing this procedure five times. This script can be run with the following command:
```
python dfe_models.py --prefix {output} --fs {pop1_pop2_mutation_type.fs} --dfe_model {biv_lognormal_shared, biv_lognormal_ind, or mixture_lognormal} --pneu {optional arg to fit a symmetric neutral point mass} --ppos {optional arg to fit a symmetric benefical point mass} --gammapos {specifies gamma value for beneficial point mass} --cache1d {cache1D.bpkl} --cache2d {cache2D.bpkl} --mut {mutation_rate}  --L_neut {effective sequence length for neutral compartment} --L_sel {effective sequence length for selected compartment} --theta_neut {inferred theta for demographic model} --job_id {job_number}
```
Where the `--fspre` flag specifies the FS object corresponding to the population pair and mutation type for which inference should be conducted. The `--dfe_model` specifies the DFE parameterization (either `biv_lognormal_shared` for a bivariate lognormal DFE with shared marginal parameters, `biv_lognormal_ind` for a bivariate lognormal DFE with independent marginal parameters, or `mixture_lognormal` for a DFE modeled by a mixture of a 1D distribution with weight 1-*w* (representing perfectly correlated fitness effects) and a 2D distribution with weight *w* (representing uncorrelated fitness effects, ρ=0)). Note the `mixture_lognormal` model is not used in this study. The optional `--pneu` and `--ppos` flags specify whether the DFE model should include a point mass of neutral or beneficial mutations, respectively. For `--ppos` models, the `--gammapos` specifies what fixed beneficial `gamma` value should be used. The `--cache1d` and `--cache2d` flags specify the 1D and 2D caches generated above with the `dfe_cache.py` script. The `--mut` flag specifies what per-generation, per-base pair mutation rate should be assumed. The `--L_neut` and `--L_sel` flags specify the effective sequence lengths assumed for the intergenic (assumed neutral) class used for demographic inference and the putatively selected class of mutations for which the DFE is being inferred (see Materials and Methods section of the paper for details). The `--theta_neut` flag specifies the `theta` inferred for the neutral demographic model. The `--job_id` specifies which replicate optimization ID to use in output file names. This script returns a `.params` file containing the best-fit parameter estimates for five independent optimizations and their corresponding likelihoods. This analysis should ideally be run many times for many intitial starting parameters in order to thoroughly explore the parameter space.

Once best-fit parameter estimates have been obtained for candidate models, we can use the `godambe.py` script to conduct likelihood ratio tests, compute AIC, and estimate parameter uncertainties in a manner that is appropriate for composite likelihoods. Prior to utilizing ∂a∂i's GIM functions, we first need to create bootstrap 2D SFS for each population pair and mutation type being analyzed. Bootstrap generation can be performed by passing the following arguments to `godambe.py`:
```
python godambe.py --prefix {output} --fs {pop1_pop2_mutation_type.fs} --dfe_model {biv_lognormal_shared, biv_lognormal_ind, or mixture_lognormal} --cache1d {cache1D.bpkl} --cache2d {cache2D.bpkl} --mut {mutation_rate}  --L_neut {effective sequence length for neutral compartment} --L_sel {effective sequence length for selected compartment} --theta_neut {inferred theta for demographic model} --make_boot {instructs the program to make bootstrapped datasets for the given FS} --vcf {mutation_type.vcf.gz} --popfile {pop1_pop2.popfile}
```
Once these bootstrap FS have been generated, adjusted likelihood ratio tests can be performed for nested models by passing the following arguments to `godambe.py`:
```
python godambe.py --prefix {output} --fs {pop1_pop2_mutation_type.fs} --dfe_model {biv_lognormal_shared, biv_lognormal_ind, or mixture_lognormal} --cache1d {cache1D.bpkl} --cache2d {cache2D.bpkl} --mut {mutation_rate}  --L_neut {effective sequence length for neutral compartment} --L_sel {effective sequence length for selected compartment} --theta_neut {inferred theta for demographic model} --lrt {instructs program to conduct LRT} --complex_model {pneu or ppos} --simple_popt {param1 param2 ... paramN} --complex_popt {param1 param2 ... paramN}
```
Where the `--complex_model` flag specifies whether the more complex model involves the addition of a neutral (`pneu`) or beneficial (`ppos`) point mass. The `--simple_popt` and `--complex_popt` flags take in a space-delimited list of inferred DFE parameters (excluding theta and the likelihood) for the simpler and more complex models, respectively. 
Composite likelihood-adjusted AIC values can be computed for a given model by passing the following arguments to `godambe.py`:
```
python godambe.py --prefix {output} --fs {pop1_pop2_mutation_type.fs} --dfe_model {biv_lognormal_shared, biv_lognormal_ind, or mixture_lognormal} --cache1d {cache1D.bpkl} --cache2d {cache2D.bpkl} --mut {mutation_rate}  --L_neut {effective sequence length for neutral compartment} --L_sel {effective sequence length for selected compartment} --theta_neut {inferred theta for demographic model} --claic {instructs program to compute CL-AIC} --best_fit_model {base, pneu, or ppos} --best_fit_popt {param1 param2 ... paramN}
```
Where the `--best_fit_model` specifies whether the given DFE parameterization (set by `--dfe_model`) should include a point mass of neutral (`pneu`) or beneficial (`ppos`) mutations, or should be left as a continuous deleterious-only distribution (`base`). The `--best_fit_popt` specifies a space-delimited list of inferred DFE parameters (excluding theta and the likelihood) for the model being analyzed. 
Finally, the standard deviations of inferred DFE parameters can be computed for a given model by passing the following arguments to `godambe.py`:
```
python godambe.py --prefix {output} --fs {pop1_pop2_mutation_type.fs} --dfe_model {biv_lognormal_shared, biv_lognormal_ind, or mixture_lognormal} --cache1d {cache1D.bpkl} --cache2d {cache2D.bpkl} --mut {mutation_rate}  --L_neut {effective sequence length for neutral compartment} --L_sel {effective sequence length for selected compartment} --theta_neut {inferred theta for demographic model} --uncert {instructs program to estimate parameter uncertainties} --best_fit_model {base, pneu, or ppos} --best_fit_popt {param1 param2 ... paramN}
```

Once best-fit models have been identified, we can use the `dfe_eval.py` script to inspect the fit of the given model parameters to the observed joint (2D) and marginal (1D) unfolded site frequency spectra for a given population pair and mutation type. This script can be run as follows:
```
python dfe_eval.py --prefix {output} --fs {pop1_pop2_mutation_type.fs} --dfe_model {biv_lognormal_shared, biv_lognormal_ind, or mixture_lognormal} --pneu {optional arg to fit a symmetric neutral point mass} --ppos {optional arg to fit a symmetric benefical point mass} --gammapos {specifies gamma value for beneficial point mass} --cache1d {cache1D.bpkl} --cache2d {cache2D.bpkl} --mut {mutation_rate}  --L_neut {effective sequence length for neutral compartment} --L_sel {effective sequence length for selected compartment} --theta_neut {inferred theta for demographic model} --p_misid {pmisid} --popt {param1 param2 ... paramN}
```
Where the `--p_misid` flag specifies the inferred rate of ancestral state misidentification and the `--popt` flag specifies a space-delimited list of inferred DFE parameters (excluding theta, the likelihood, and the inferred `p_misid`) for the model being analyzed. 


